About me:
I am a practical man, always have the urge of doing something using my expertise and understanding but lack of opportunities, created a void in me, lowering my self confidence and I started doubting myself that whether am good enough. The struggle was unbearable but it helped me to keep pushing boundaries, each day of struggle taught me something and with the new knowledge I kept pushing. I came with a quote

 “ struggles are the building block of life”

 It enhances your personality, your way of thinking and transform you into new version of yourself, though struggles are never ending but I keep pushing myself until the point I reach the goal I deserve.
My vision is clear to use all materials, which are waste and convert them into something useful, sustainable, provide meaning to the society, and I will take help of mycelium as they are the natures hidden arcitect

 so mycelium journey started during a mandatory project which was necessary during my curriculum in my masters, I met a professor (prof. Ingo Johannsen)  who wanted to make mycelium based composites, and showed me a small mycelium brick prototype and asked me whether I can make something similar using waste material. He said he will provide me the mycelium strain, and the waste material and I need to make the mycelium bricks and also cultivate  the strain under laboratory condition and if possible identify the type of strain.

 the task was a bit challenging at first because I never worked with fungi before but I told myself that the experiences I have while doing my bachelor in biotechnology, I can use them and make this project successful.

 so I gathered all the information like procedures, properties, growing conditions (as the strain was unknown so I was not aware about the growing condition), I finally made the bricks using different waste materials provided also I analysed the substrate to waste material ratio in order to make the perfect bricks at the same time grew the strain in the laboratory condition. I tried to verify the type of mushroom by seeing the texture under microscope, but could do more by extracting the Dan and do the whole process but time was really less as it was small project work.

 I will now describe the steps I did in my experiment along with the original images from the experiment, this experiment enhanced my understanding and my confidence in making other mycelium based composites apart from bricks.

 starting with my project description (doing independently without any help)
So first I was provided with the mushroom strain (initial substrate), with the texture (fine white web or frost Up close, these "threads" (hyphae) are soft and fuzzy, spreading across the substrate like a thick layer of cotton), which was somehow close to oyster mushroom. So I assumed it to be oyster mushroom.
So I divided my tasks:
Make initial bricks from the substrate provided.
Take small samples of mycelium from the top of the brick and cultivate them in Petri dish.
Making several clones from the first set of culture by taking small sections of mycelium and then they were grown again in Petri dish and slants (liquid culture), I did it to check whether the grown culture is mycelium or being contaminated).
Finally, making more mycelium bricks, this time making my own substrate from the strain which I cultivated and adding different waste material provided to me to check whether they will grow in then or not
Growing more bricks this time changing the substrate to waste ratio ( 50-50, 60-40, 80-20) to see the growing difference, and checking different properties like strength, flexibility etc.

 now starting with first task ( Make initial bricks from the substrate provided.)
So I took the substrate in a container and added flour(nutrient supplement, I added 10% of flour to the total weight of substrate) and mixed them properly and then put them in a brick shaped plastic chamber ( the plastic chamber already had holes in them), then I covered the plastic chamber with plastic completely, and made holes again.

 as mentioned , initial verification of mycelium strain was very close to oyster mushroom, I used the its growing conditions and kept my plastic chamber inside incubator for 7 to 8 days at 23-24 degree celsius and 30 to 40 percent humidity.

 After 8 days I checked it and found that the bricks were properly build and I did several initial tests
Eye testing (initial observation): it was really pure white web like structure and mycelium was it self very soft, as this point I was kinda cute it was oyster mushroom.
Microscope test: I checked it in microscope (it was fine threads spread like a thick layer of cotton).
Initial strength test: The brick was very strong and flexible
Smell test: smell was like mushroom
Initial moisture test: I measure the weight of the brick to get the initial weight
After doing the initial test, I kept the bricks inside the heater for 3 to 4 hours at 75-85 degree celsius.

 after heating I did the above test again

 1. Eye testing (After heating observation): now the structure was more intact, 
Microscope test: after drying the structure was very intact, strongly packed
Final strength test: more rigid, though there was a bit flexibility
Smell test: the initial mushroom smell was almost gone, the smell was like dried wood, with a slight touch of mushroomy.
Final moisture test: the bricks were comparatively lighter so there was signifiant amount of moisture content.

 Second task (Take small samples of mycelium from the top of the brick and cultivate them in Petri dish)

 I prepared the agar solution and sterilised them inside the autoclave, after cooling I poured them in several (total 6) Petri dishes inside the air flow chamber and allowed them to rest until they solidified. The small mycelium samples were the put inside the Petri dishes and sealed using parafilm and marked with date and number and then kept inside the incubator for 7 to 8 days (at 23-24 degree celsius and 30 to 40 percent humidity). After 8 days it was taken out and observed, out of which 4 were totally well grown and 2 were contaminated and other green fungal colony was observed and the two were discarded.

 third task(Making several clones from the first set of  good culture by taking small sections of mycelium and then they were grown again in Petri dish and slants (liquid culture), I did it to check whether the grown culture is mycelium or being contaminated)
      As mentioned, several other clones are made using the first culture but this time both in solid media (Petri dishes, again total 6) and liquid culture (slants total 6). It was done to check whether the grown culture is mycelium or being contaminated. After growth it was confirmed that it was mycelium as contamination was not seen and any of the second culture.

 fourth task(Finally, making more mycelium bricks, this time making my own substrate from the strains which I cultivated(in first and second culture both from solid and liquid media) and adding different waste material(two kind 1 and 2) provided to me to check whether they will grow in them or not)
The bricks grew very well, but due to different properties of the waste material, the bricks were way more flexible and soft. After heating, they were hard but showed brittle properties.

 fifth task(Growing more bricks this time changing the substrate to waste ratio ( 50-50, 60-40, 80-20) to see the growing difference, and checking different properties like strength, flexibility etc)

 Several mycelium bricks were made by varying the concentration of mycelium substrate and the two kinds of waste material. At first 50 percent of mycelium substrate was mixed with 50 percent of waste material, the bricks were well formed but as we increased the percentage of waste material to the substrate, we saw the structure loose the intactness, mainly due to fine texture of the waste material the mycelium were not able to delve deep due to less air.
So the result:
60:40 ( substrate to waste material): excellent
50:50( good)
40:60 (okay but slightly loose structure, can break if subtle amount of force is applied, brittleness increases9
20:80( no brick formation)

similarly after that I created paper using mycelium(mushroom) as well, and keep on exploring what I can make in the future

Products which can be made (my focus)

 1.Algae(mainly from plaudiculture) with mycelium: good paper
Mycelium fabrics: mycelium silk(mushroom silk)
Mycelium for acoustic wall panels, textured tiles
Mycelium construction material (Mycelium foam)
Mycelium kitchen utensils and cutleries: edible spoons, fungi cutlery, bioceramic table ware
Mycelium leather
Mycelium decorative items

Image References:
Irpex lacteus: https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/130910-Irpex-lacteus/browse_photos

Daedaleopsis confragosa:https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/124102-Daedaleopsis-confragosa/browse_photos

Fomes fomentarius: https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/127510-Fomes-fomentarius

Pleurotus ostreatus: https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/48494-Pleurotus-ostreatus/browse_photos

Trametes versicolor: https://www.first-nature.com/fungi/trametes-versicolor.php

Schizophyllum commune: https://www.mushroomexpert.com/schizophyllum_commune.html




Ganoderma williamsianum: https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/1123719-Ganoderma-williamsianum/browse_photos


 Lentinus sajor-caju: https://www.inaturalist.org/taxa/361632-Lentinus-sajor-caju/browse_photos

Ganoderma lucidum: https://www.first-nature.com/fungi/ganoderma-lucidum.php


1.Mycelium fabrics: mycelium silk(mushroom silk): https://www.leoniehaeussermann.com/mycelium-vs-raquel-ledo-doval
Mycelium for acoustic wall panels & textured tiles: https://www.archiproducts.com/en/mogu?srsltid=AfmBOoqAehtjU01xK_xOGxwh5kRCrfBXYG1nEDJGrCpYqaKdDyt_heXX
Mycelium construction material (Mycelium foam) images: https://www.mnext.nl/en/projects/building-on-mycelium-2/

Mycelium kitchen utensils & cutleries (edible spoons, fungi cutlery, bioceramic tableware): https://malacasa.com/en-de/blogs/journal/mycelium-bioceramic-tableware?srsltid=AfmBOoq2RMfidp5nTHCvKrWKW8iBKcDtLbinq1lcjPfOQCWTU9fJe1VH
Mycelium leather: https://icff.com/stories/a-biomaterial-that-challenges-leather/

Mycelium decorative items: https://jenweiart.com/stampsAndMycelium/mycelium.html

Algae(mainly from plaudiculture) with mycelium: good paper: https://www.societyforscience.org/blog/harvesting-wild-algae-to-make-paper/

